Data Generation - Features (#346)
FabricMC/fabric-docs: develop/data-generation/world.md

---
title: World Generation
description: A guide to setting up world generation with datagen.
authors:
  - Wind292

> authors-nogithub:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
title: World Generation
description: A guide to setting up world generation with datagen.
authors:
  - cassiancc
  - Wind292
---

<!---->

::: info PREREQUISITES

Make sure you've completed the [datagen setup](./setup) process first.

:::

## World Generation Structure {#world-generation-structure}

The generation for features of Minecraft worlds is broken down into 3 parts.

- **Configured Features**: This defines what features themselves are; this would be like a single tree in a forest.
- **Placement Features**: This defines how the features should be laid out, what direction, relative location, and so on; this would be like the forest.
- **Biome Modifications**: This defines where in the world the features are placed on a global scale; this would be like what coordinates the forest would be at.

::: info

Features in Minecraft are natural or generated objects in the world like trees, flowers, ores, or lakes. Features are not structures (villages, temples, etc.), and cannot be found with the `/locate` command.

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The generation for features of Minecraft worlds is broken down into 3 parts:

- **Configured Features**: this defines what a feature is; for example, a single tree
- **Placement Features**: this defines how the features should be laid out, in which direction, relative location, and so on; for example, the placement of trees in a forest
- **Biome Modifications**: this defines where the features are placed in the world; for example, the coordinates of the whole forest

::: info

Features in Minecraft are natural or generated patterns in the world, like trees, flowers, ores, or lakes. Features are different from structures (for example villages, temples...), which can be found with the `/locate` command.

:::
```

## Setup {#setup}

First, we need to make our provider. Create a class that extends `FabricDynamicRegistryProvider` and fill out the base methods:

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:provider](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/worldgen/ExampleModWorldgenProvider.java)

Then add this provider to your `DataGeneratorEntrypoint` class within the `onInitializeDataGenerator` method:

> @[code lang=java transclude={52-52}](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/ExampleModDataGenerator.java)

Reviewer: this broke

> Next, make a class for your Configured Features and a class for your Placed Features, these don't need to extend anything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, make a class for your Configured Features and a class for your Placed Features. These don't need to extend anything.
```

The Configured Feature class and Placed Feature class should both have a public method where you will register and define your Configured / Placed feature.

> This method should take a `BootstrapContext<ConfiguredFeature<?, ?>>` argument for the Configured Feature and a `BootstrapContext<PlacedFeature>` for the Placed Feature (both referred to as context in this example).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Configured Feature class and Placed Feature class should both have a public method to register and define your features. Its argument, that we called `context`, should be a `BootstrapContext<ConfiguredFeature<?, ?>>` for the Configured Feature, or a `BootstrapContext<PlacedFeature>` for the Placed Feature.
```

I'm not 100% sure what this is saying

> In your `DataGeneratorEntrypoint` class, add the lines below to your `buildRegistry` method (Replacing the placeholder methods).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your `DataGeneratorEntrypoint` class, add the lines below to your `buildRegistry` method, replacing the method name with what you chose:
```

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:registries](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/ExampleModDataGenerator.java)

If you don't already have the `buildRegistry` method, create it and annotate it with an `@Override`.

## Configured Features {#configured-features}

> To make a feature naturally spawn in our world we should start by defining the Configured Feature in our Configured Features class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make a feature naturally spawn in our world we should start by defining a Configured Feature in our Configured Features class. Let's add a custom Configured Feature for a Diamond Ore vein.
```

> First, register the key for the `ConfiguredFeature` in your Configured Feature class by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, register the key for the `ConfiguredFeature` in your Configured Feature class:
```

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:configured-key](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/worldgen/ExampleModWorldConfiguredFeatures.java)

::: tip

> The second argument to the `ResourceLocation` (`diamond_block_vein` in this example) is what you would use to spawn in the structure with the `/place` command, which is helpful for debugging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second argument to the `Identifier` (`diamond_block_vein` in this example) is what you would use to spawn in the structure with the `/place` command, which is helpful for debugging.
```

:::

### Ores {#ores}

Next, we'll make a `RuleTest` that controls what blocks your feature can replace.

> This `RuleTest` allows the replacement for every block with the tag `DEEP_SLATE_ORE_REPLACEABLES`; another useful tag for ores is `STONE_ORE_REPLACEABLES`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we'll make a `RuleTest` that controls which blocks your feature can replace. For example, this `RuleTest` allows the replacement of every block with the tag `DEEPSLATE_ORE_REPLACEABLES`:
```

since I think the source code already defines `stoneReplaceableRule`, I'd add another embed under this one, saying:

```md
Another useful tag when implementing ores is `STONE_ORE_REPLACEABLES`:

@[code transcludeWith=::: ](...)
```

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:ruletest](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/worldgen/ExampleModWorldConfiguredFeatures.java)

> Next we need to create the `OreFeatureConfig`. The `OreFeatureConfig` tells the game what to replace blocks with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we need to create the `OreConfiguration`, which tells the game what to replace blocks with.
```

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:ore-feature-config](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/worldgen/ExampleModWorldConfiguredFeatures.java)

> You can have multiple cases in the list for different variants of the ore, for example a deepslate variant:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can have multiple cases in the list for different variants. For example, let's set a different variant for stone and deepslate:
```

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:multi-ore-feature-config](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/worldgen/ExampleModWorldConfiguredFeatures.java)

Lastly, we need to register our Configured Feature to our game!

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:conf-feature-register](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/worldgen/ExampleModWorldConfiguredFeatures.java)

### Trees {#trees}

> To make a custom tree, you need to first create a `TreeFeatureConfig`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make a custom tree, you need to first create a `TreeConfiguration`:
```

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:tree-feature-config](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/worldgen/ExampleModWorldConfiguredFeatures.java)

- Argument 1 — Specifies the block type for the tree trunk (in this case, diamond blocks).
- Argument 2 — Configures the trunk shape and height behavior using a trunk placer.
- Argument 3 — Specifies the block type for the tree leaves (in this case, gold blocks).
- Argument 4 — Defines the foliage's shape and size using a foliage placer.

> - Argument 5 — Controls how the tree trunk tapers at different heights, primarily for larger trunks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is what each argument does:

1. Specifies the block type for the tree trunk; for example, diamond blocks
2. Configures the trunk shape and height behavior using a trunk placer
3. Specifies the block type for the tree leaves; for example, gold blocks
4. Defines the foliage's shape and size using a foliage placer
5. Controls how the tree trunk tapers at different heights, primarily for larger trunks
```

::: tip

We _highly_ recommend that you play around with these values to create a custom tree that **you** are happy with!

You can use the built-in placers for the Trunk and Foliage from the vanilla trees as a reference.

:::

Next, we need to register our tree by adding the following line to the `configure` method of `ExampleModWorldConfiguredFeatures`.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:tree-register](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/worldgen/ExampleModWorldConfiguredFeatures.java)

## Placement Features {#placement-features}

The next step in adding a feature to the game is creating its Placement Feature.

> In your Placed Features class's method with the argument of `BootstrapContext<PlacedFeature>` create a variable like the one below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your Placed Features class's `configure` method, create a variable like the one below:
```

I know one can call the method whatever they want, but giving it a name is clearer imo

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:conf-feature-register](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/worldgen/ExampleModWorldPlacedFeatures.java)

In your Placed Features class, define the key for your Placed Feature.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:placed-key](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/worldgen/ExampleModWorldPlacedFeatures.java)

### Placement Modifiers {#placement-modifiers}

Next we need to define our Placement Modifiers. Placement Modifiers are attributes that you add to the spawning of the feature in the game; this can be anything from how often it spawns to what `y` level it spawns at.

> You can have as few or as many modifiers as you like.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we need to define our Placement Modifiers, which are attributes that you set when spawning the feature. These can be anything: from the spawn frequency, to the starting `y` level. You can have as few or as many modifiers as you like.
```

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:placement-modifier](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/worldgen/ExampleModWorldPlacedFeatures.java)

The function of each modifier listed is as follows:

- **CountPlacement** - Roughly the amount of instances of this feature per chunk (in this case veins per chunk)
- **BiomeFilter** - Allows us to control what biomes/dimensions it spawns (we'll do more on this later)
- **InSquarePlacement** - Disperses the features more pseudo-randomly
- **HeightRangePlacement** - Specifies the range of `y` coordinates where a feature can spawn; it supports three main types of distributions:
  1. **Uniform:**
     All `y` values within the range are equally likely to contain the feature.

  2. **Trapezoid:**
     `y` values closer to the median `y` value have a higher probability of containing the feature.

  3. **Biased-Bottom:**

>      Uses a logarithmic scale where lower `y` values are more common for the feature, starting from a minimum `y` coordinate below which the feature never spawns. The second argument is the max height that the feature can spawn. The third argument defines a range in blocks over which the maximum probability is extended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **CountPlacement**: Roughly the amount of instances of this feature (in this case veins) per chunk
- **BiomeFilter**: Allows us to control what biomes/dimensions it spawns (we'll do more with this later)
- **InSquarePlacement**: Spreads the features more pseudo-randomly
- **HeightRangePlacement**: Specifies the range of `y` coordinates where a feature can spawn; it supports three main types of distributions:
  1. **Uniform**:
     All `y` values within the range are equally likely to contain the feature. If you're unsure, just use this one.

  2. **Trapezoid**:
     `y` values closer to the median `y` value have a higher probability of containing the feature.

  3. **Biased-Bottom**:
     Uses a logarithmic scale where lower `y` values are more likely to get the feature. It receives a starting `y` coordinate, below which the feature never spawns. The second argument is the maximum height where the feature can spawn. The third argument defines a range in blocks over which the maximum probability is extended.
```

::: tip

If you're unsure which `HeightRangePlacement` to use for your ore, just use Uniform.

:::

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

::: tip

> Trees and other surface structures should include the modifier `PlacedFeatures.WORLD_SURFACE_WG_HEIGHTMAP` instead of `HeightRangePlacement` to make the tree to spawn at the surface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trees and other surface structures should include the modifier `PlacedFeatures.WORLD_SURFACE_WG_HEIGHTMAP` instead of `HeightRangePlacement`, to make sure the tree spawns on the surface.
```

:::

> Now that we have the modifiers, we can register our Placed Feature with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have the modifiers, we can register our Placed Feature:
```

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:register-placed-feature](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/worldgen/ExampleModWorldPlacedFeatures.java)

## Biome Modifications {#biome-modifications}

> Lastly, we need to add our Placed Feature to `BiomeModifications` during mod initialization, we can do this by adding the following line to our mod initiializer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lastly, we need to add our Placed Feature to `BiomeModifications` during mod initialization. We can do this by adding the following to our mod initiializer:
```

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:biome-modifications](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/ExampleMod.java)

::: tip

> Trees should have the `GenerationStep.Decoration` of `GenerationStep.Decoration.VEGETAL_DECORATION,`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For trees, the second parameter should be set to `GenerationStep.Decoration.VEGETAL_DECORATION,`
```

:::

### Biome Specific Generation {#biome-specific-generation}

> By changing the BiomeSelectors argument, we can have our feature only spawn in a specific biome or type of biome.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By changing the `BiomeSelectors` argument, we can have our feature spawn only in a specific type of biome:
```

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-world:selective-biome-modifications](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/ExampleMod.java)

This would only spawn in biomes tagged with the `minecraft:is_forest` biome tag.

## Running Datagen {#running-datagen}

> Now when you run datagen, you should see a `.json` file in `src/main/generated/data/example-mod/worldgen/configured_feature` for each Configured Feature you added and a file in `src/main/generated/data/example-mod/worldgen/placed_feature` for each Placed Feature you added!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, when you run datagen, you should see a `.json` file under `src/main/generated/data/example-mod/worldgen/configured_feature` for each Configured Feature you added, and a file under `src/main/generated/data/example-mod/worldgen/placed_feature` for each Placed Feature as well!
```

- Is the file name `.../configured_feature/feature_name.json`?
- Does it really use underscores, seeing the hyphen in `example-mod`?

### Example Configured Feature `.json` File {#example-configured-features}

@[code lang=json](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/data/example-mod/worldgen/configured_feature/diamond_block_vein.json)

### Example Placed Feature `.json` File {#example-placed-feature}

> @[code lang=json](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/data/example-mod/worldgen/placed_feature/diamond_block_ore_placed.json)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: details Generated File for the Configured Feature

@[code lang=json](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/data/example-mod/worldgen/configured_feature/diamond_block_vein.json)

:::

::: details Generated File for the Placed Feature

@[code lang=json](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/data/example-mod/worldgen/placed_feature/diamond_block_ore_placed.json)

:::
```

   - cassiancc
   - Wind292
---

## World Generation Structure {#world-generation-structure}

::: info PREREQUISITES

Make sure you've completed the [datagen setup](./setup) process first.

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!---->

::: info PREREQUISITES

Make sure you've completed the [datagen setup](./setup) process first.

:::

## World Generation Structure {#world-generation-structure}
```
